today we are going to be talking about
the rainshadow effect and in order to do
that we need to draw a diagram of a
mountain so let's get started there so
here's the mountain and let's assume air
is coming in from this direction so the
wind is blowing and as the wind blows it
forces that air up the mountainside and
because air is blowing into the mountain
on this side we're going to call this
the windward side or wind facing side
and the other side is going to be called
the leeward side now as this wind is
blowing up the mountain this air mass
encounters less pressure it turns out
that as you move up in altitude there's
less air pressure so as this air mass
moves up it begins to expand and is that
air mass expands the temperature of that
air mass begins to drop now the
temperature doesn't drop because heat is
lost to the surrounding air the
temperature drops because the pressure
because those air molecules aren't as
close to each other as they used to be
and that's important there's actually a
term that means that this is referred to
as adiabatic cooling
and adiabatic means that there's no
addition or loss of heat going out here
so the temperature of this air mass
decreases because the air expands not
because it loses heat to the surrounding
air and that's important to understand
now as the air mass moves up here the
air is cooled and as the air gets cooler
we know that cool air can't hold as much
moisture so what begins to happen is
cloud would start to form and it begins
to rain and this side of the mountain is
going to be very wet in fact it's so wet
sometimes it actually forms a cloud
forest so let's write that down
cloud forest so the side of the mountain
is often very lush and vegetation and
trees a beautiful area now is that air
makes its way to the top it has launched
depending on the size of the mountain
oftentimes that air mass has lost pretty
much all of its moisture and when the
air mass gets to the other side it's a
very dry mass of air and once it gets to
the other side that air is going to
begin to sink so let's go ahead and draw
that
so our air is beginning to sink now and
as that air sinks that air mass
encounters greater pressure the air the
surrounding air begins to squeeze this
air mass and as it does that air mass
begins to heat up now again it doesn't
heat up because the surrounding air is
giving it additional heat it heats up
because the surrounding air is squeezing
if it's doing work on it it's squeezing
it and compressing it forcing those air
molecules closer together that is
referred to as adiabatic heating
and what you end up with here is a very
warm dry mass of air so warm and dry
where the side over here was very cool
and wet this is very warm and dry in
fact this air is sometimes so dry that
it creates a rain channel what you get
here is a desert some of the driest
places in the world are created with the
rain shadow effect a notable place would
be Death Valley out in California one of
the driest places in the world and that
is created by in part by the Sierra
Nevadas a very high mountain range
blocking that win forcing that air up
and over in creating extremely dry
conditions on the other side and that's
going to be it for the rain shadow
effect